 MACHINE LEARNING
ASSIGNMENT NAME:  FEATURE ENGINEERING
NAME: HARSH KUMAR SHARMA
 E-MAIL: harsh13016@gmail.com
1. What is a parameter?
Answer1- A parameter is a value used by a machine learning model to make predictions. These values 
are learned automatically from the training data during the learning process. Parameters help the model 
understand the relationship between input and output variables. For example, in a linear regression 
model, the weights and intercept are parameters that determine the prediction made by the model.
2. What is correlation? What does negative correlation mean?
Answer2- Correlation is a statistical measure that shows the strength and direction of the relationship 
between two variables. It helps us understand whether changes in one variable are associated with 
changes in another variable.
Negative correlation means that the two variables move in opposite directions. When one variable 
increases, the other decreases. For example, as the amount of time spent exercising increases, body fat 
percentage may decrease. This indicates a negative correlation between exercise and body fat.
3. Define Machine Learning. What are the main components in Machine Learning?
Answer3- Machine Learning is a branch of Artificial Intelligence that enables computers to learn from 
data and improve their performance without being explicitly programmed for every task. Instead of 
following fixed rules, machine learning systems identify patterns in data and use them to make 
predictions or decisions.
The main components of Machine Learning are:
1. Data – The information used for training the model. 
2. Features – The input variables used to make predictions. 
3. Model – The algorithm that learns patterns from data. 
4. Loss Function – Measures the prediction error. 
5. Optimizer – Reduces the error by adjusting parameters. 
6. Training Process – The process of teaching the model. 
7. Evaluation Metrics – Used to measure model performance. 
4. How does loss value help in determining whether the model is good or not?
Answer4- Loss value is a measure of how far the model's predictions are from the actual values. It 
helps us understand the accuracy of a model during training.
A high loss value indicates that the model is making large errors, while a low loss value indicates that 
the model's predictions are close to the actual results. During training, the goal of the model is to 
minimize the loss value. Therefore, a lower loss generally indicates a better-performing model.
5. What are continuous and categorical variables?
Answer5- Variables are characteristics or attributes that can take different values.
Continuous Variables
Continuous variables can take any numerical value within a range. These values are measurable and 
can contain decimal points.
Examples: Height, weight, temperature, age, salary.
Categorical Variables
Categorical variables represent groups, categories, or labels rather than numerical quantities.
Examples: Gender, blood group, city, color, department.
Continuous variables are measured, whereas categorical variables are classified into groups.
6. How do we handle categorical variables in Machine Learning? What are the common techniques?
Answer6- Machine learning algorithms generally work with numerical data. Therefore, categorical 
variables must be converted into numerical form before training a model.
Some common techniques are:
1. Label Encoding
Each category is assigned a unique number.
Example:
• Red = 0 
• Blue = 1 
• Green = 2 
2. One-Hot Encoding
Creates separate columns for each category and assigns 0 or 1 values.
3. Ordinal Encoding
Used when categories have a meaningful order.
Example:
• Low = 1 
• Medium = 2 
• High = 3 
These techniques make categorical data suitable for machine learning models.
7. What do you mean by training and testing a dataset?
Answer8- In Machine Learning, the dataset is usually divided into two parts: training data and testing 
data. The training dataset is used to teach the model and help it learn patterns from the data. The testing 
dataset is used after training to evaluate how well the model performs on unseen data.
This division helps determine whether the model can generalize well to new data instead of simply 
memorizing the training examples.
8. What is sklearn.preprocessing?
Answer8- sklearn.preprocessing is a module provided by the Scikit-Learn library in Python. It contains 
various tools used to prepare and transform data before training machine learning models.
This module helps in tasks such as:
• Feature scaling 
• Data normalization 
• Data standardization 
• Encoding categorical variables 
Proper preprocessing improves the efficiency and accuracy of machine learning models.
9. What is a Test Set?
Answer9- A test set is a portion of the dataset that is kept separate from the training process. It is used 
to evaluate the performance of a trained machine learning model.
The model does not see the test data during training. Therefore, testing provides a fair estimate of how 
well the model will perform on new and unseen data in real-world situations.
10. How do we split data for model fitting (training and testing) in Python? How do you approach a 
Machine Learning problem?
Answer10- In Python, data is commonly split using the train_test_split() function from 
Scikit-Learn. Typically, 80% of the data is used for training and 20% for testing.
General Approach to a Machine Learning Problem
1. Understand the problem. 
2. Collect and prepare data. 
3. Perform Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA). 
4. Clean and preprocess the data. 
5. Split the data into training and testing sets. 
6. Select an appropriate model. 
7. Train the model. 
8. Evaluate its performance. 
9. Improve and optimize the model. 
10.Deploy the final model. 
Following these steps helps in building an effective machine learning solution.
11. Why do we have to perform EDA before fitting a model to the data?
Answer11- EDA (Exploratory Data Analysis) is an important step that helps us understand the dataset 
before training a machine learning model.
EDA helps in:
• Identifying missing values 
• Detecting outliers 
• Understanding data distribution 
• Finding relationships between variables 
• Identifying data quality issues 
By performing EDA, we can make better decisions about data cleaning and feature selection, which 
improves model performance.
12. What is correlation?
Answer12- Correlation is a statistical technique used to determine the relationship between two 
variables. It indicates whether the variables increase together, decrease together, or move in opposite 
directions.
The correlation coefficient ranges from -1 to +1:
• +1 = Perfect positive correlation 
•-1 = Perfect negative correlation 
• 0 = No correlation 
Correlation is widely used in data analysis and machine learning for feature selection.
13. What does negative correlation mean?
Answer13- Negative correlation means that two variables move in opposite directions. When one 
variable increases, the other variable decreases.
For example, as the number of hours spent watching television increases, the amount of study time may 
decrease. This indicates a negative relationship between the two variables.
A correlation value close to -1 indicates a strong negative correlation.
14. How can you find correlation between variables in Python?
Answer14- Correlation between variables can be calculated using the corr() method in the Pandas 
library.
The method generates a correlation matrix that shows the relationship between all numerical variables 
in the dataset.
This matrix helps identify highly related variables, which can be useful for feature selection and 
understanding the data structure before model building.
15. What is causation? Explain the difference between correlation and causation with an example.
Answer15- Causation means that one event directly causes another event to occur. It represents a true 
cause-and-effect relationship.
Correlation only shows that two variables are related, but it does not prove that one causes the other.
Example:
Ice cream sales and drowning incidents both increase during summer.
These two variables are correlated because they increase together. However, buying ice cream does not 
cause drowning. The actual cause is hot weather, which increases both ice cream consumption and 
swimming activities.
Therefore, correlation does not always imply causation.
16. What is an Optimizer? What are different types of optimizers?
Answer16- An optimizer is an algorithm used to improve a machine learning model by reducing the 
loss function. It adjusts the model parameters so that prediction errors become smaller.
Types of Optimizers
1. Gradient Descent
Uses the entire dataset to update parameters.
2. Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
Updates parameters after processing each training example.
3. Mini-Batch Gradient Descent
Uses small batches of data for parameter updates.
4. Adam Optimizer
Combines the benefits of momentum and adaptive learning rates. It is widely used because it is fast and 
efficient. Optimizers play a key role in helping models learn effectively.
17. What is sklearn.linear_model?
Answer17- sklearn.linear_model is a module in the Scikit-Learn library that contains algorithms based 
on linear mathematical relationships.
Some popular models available in this module are:
• Linear Regression 
• Logistic Regression 
• Ridge Regression 
• Lasso Regression 
These algorithms are commonly used for prediction and classification tasks.
18. What does model.fit() do? What arguments must be given?
Answer18- The model.fit() function is used to train a machine learning model using the provided 
dataset. During training, the model learns patterns and relationships from the data.
The function generally requires two arguments:
• X – Input features 
• y – Target or output values 
After training, the model becomes capable of making predictions on new data.
19. What does model.predict() do? What arguments must be given?
Answer19- The model.predict() function is used to generate predictions using a trained machine 
learning model. It takes input features as an argument and produces predicted outputs based on what 
the model learned during training. This function is commonly used after training to evaluate model 
performance or make real-world predictions.
20. What are Continuous and Categorical Variables?
Answer20- In Machine Learning and Statistics, variables are the characteristics or attributes of data that 
can have different values. These variables are generally classified into two main types: continuous 
variables and categorical variables.
Continuous Variables
Continuous variables are numerical variables that can take any value within a specific range. These 
values are measurable and can include decimal points or fractions. There is no fixed limit on the 
number of values they can have.
Examples:
• Height of a person 
• Weight of a student 
• Temperature of a city 
• Salary of an employee 
• Distance traveled by a vehicle 
For example, a person's height can be 165 cm, 165.5 cm, or 165.75 cm. Therefore, height is a 
continuous variable.
Categorical Variables
Categorical variables represent different groups, categories, or labels. Instead of numerical 
measurements, they describe the qualities or classifications of data.
Examples:
• Gender (Male, Female) 
• Blood Group (A, B, AB, O) 
• City Names 
• Marital Status 
• Department Names 
For example, a student's blood group can be A, B, AB, or O. These values represent categories rather 
than measurable quantities.
Thus, continuous variables represent measurable quantities, whereas categorical variables represent 
different groups or classes.
21. What is Feature Scaling? How does it help in Machine Learning?
Answer21- Feature Scaling is the process of transforming numerical data so that all features have a 
similar range of values. In many datasets, some features may have very large values while others have 
very small values. This difference can affect the performance of machine learning algorithms.
For example, consider a dataset containing:
• Age: 18 to 60 
• Salary: 20,000 to 1,00,000 
Here, salary values are much larger than age values. As a result, the model may give more importance 
to salary and ignore age. Feature scaling helps solve this problem.
Benefits of Feature Scaling
1. Improves the performance of machine learning algorithms. 
2. Speeds up the training process. 
3. Helps the model converge faster. 
4. Prevents features with large values from dominating the learning process. 
5. Improves prediction accuracy in many algorithms. 
Feature scaling is especially important in algorithms such as K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Support 
Vector Machines (SVM), Logistic Regression, and Neural Networks.
Therefore, feature scaling helps create a balanced dataset and improves the efficiency of machine 
learning models.
22. How do we perform Scaling in Python?
Answer22- Scaling in Python is commonly performed using the Scikit-Learn library. The library 
provides several preprocessing techniques that help transform numerical features into a similar range.
One of the most commonly used methods is StandardScaler.
Importing StandardScaler: 
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
Common Scaling Techniques
1. Standardization
Transforms data so that it has a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
2. Min-Max Scaling
Scales values between 0 and 1.
3. Normalization
Adjusts values to a common scale without distorting differences.
Scaling is an important preprocessing step because it helps machine learning models learn more 
effectively and produce better results.
23. What is sklearn.preprocessing?
Answer23- sklearn.preprocessing is a module provided by the Scikit-Learn library that contains tools 
for preparing and transforming data before training a machine learning model.
Raw data is often not in a suitable format for machine learning algorithms. Therefore, preprocessing is 
required to make the data clean, consistent, and useful.
Functions of sklearn.preprocessing
1. Feature Scaling 
2. Standardization 
3. Normalization 
4. Encoding Categorical Variables 
5. Data Transformation 
Common Classes Available
• StandardScaler 
• MinMaxScaler 
• LabelEncoder 
• OneHotEncoder 
• Normalizer 
Example:
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
This module helps convert raw data into a format that machine learning algorithms can easily 
understand and process.
Therefore, sklearn.preprocessing plays an important role in improving the quality and performance of 
machine learning models.
24. How do we split data for model fitting (training and testing) in Python?
Answer24- Before training a machine learning model, the dataset must be divided into two parts: the 
training dataset and the testing dataset.
The training dataset is used to teach the model, while the testing dataset is used to evaluate the model's 
performance on unseen data.
In Python, we use the train_test_split() function from the Scikit-Learn library.
Import Statement:
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
Why Data Splitting is Important?
1. Prevents overfitting. 
2. Provides unbiased model evaluation. 
3. Helps measure real-world performance. 
4. Ensures the model can generalize to new data. 
Data splitting is a fundamental step in every machine learning project.
25. Explain Data Encoding.
Answer25- Data Encoding is the process of converting categorical or textual data into numerical values 
so that machine learning algorithms can understand and process it.
Most machine learning models work only with numbers. Therefore, categories such as names, colors, 
cities, or genders must be converted into numerical form before model training.
Example
Gender Encoded Value
Male
0
Female 1
In this example, the categorical values are converted into numbers.
Common Encoding Techniques
1. Label Encoding
Each category is assigned a unique numerical value.
Example:
• Red = 0 
• Blue = 1 
• Green = 2 
2. One-Hot Encoding
Creates separate columns for each category and uses 0 or 1 to represent the presence of a category.
Example:
Color Red Blue Green
Red 1 0 0
Blue 0 1 0
3. Ordinal Encoding
Used when categories have a natural order.
Example:
• Low = 1 
• Medium = 2 
• High = 3 
Importance of Data Encoding
1. Makes categorical data understandable to machine learning models. 
2. Improves model performance. 
3. Enables proper data processing and analysis. 
4. Helps algorithms work efficiently with non-numerical data. 
Therefore, data encoding is an essential preprocessing step in machine learning because it converts 
categorical information into a numerical format suitable for model training and prediction
